[MUSIC PLAYING]
WIM: In this
tutorial, I want
to explain how you can use
the Parsec parser combinator
library for practical
parsing tasks.
You have learned before how
to use the Show typeclass
and the show function to print
out Haskell data structures.
So in this tutorial,
I want to show you
how you can create a
parser for the output
from the Show function and then
turn it into XML, for example.
So let's start by creating
a few data structures.
So we create a data
structure PersonRecord just
as an example, where
we have the name
of the person, the
address, some integer
identifier, and a few labels.
So the Address is a data
structure in its own right
and so are the labels.
They are an algebraic
data structure like this.
Note that we have
used deriving Show
so that you don't have to
write your own Show function.
By using this
deriving clause, GHC
will automatically
create the show function
for these data structures.
And it is the output of this
automatically created show
function that we
are going to parse.
So let's create a few
instances of this data type
that we have here.
So let's say record
1 is, and record 2.
And now we can use show
on these two records,
and this is the output
that show gives us.
So it's this output
that we now want
to transform into XML
using the Parsec library.
So let's go and build a parser
I'm creating a
module showParser,
which exports a single
function ParseShow, which
is going to parse the output
from Show and turn it into XML.
To use Parsec in
practice, there are
a number of modules
that you usually need.
First, we have the actual
parser combinators,
then we have a library
of token parsers,
and then we have a handy support
library called Parsec.Language,
which defines the basics
of the programming language
by defining what is an
identifier, what is a comment,
and things like that.
But the Parsec.Token
library exports
a function makeTokenParser
and this function
takes a language definition.
Now, because we're not really
having a programming language
where we use
emptyDef, if you want
to know more about the
language definitions,
I suggest you read
the Parsec manual.
So then, given this
lexer, so basically,
the definition of
what are identifiers
and so on in our system, we can
now build a number of parsers
very conveniently like this.
So the library finds a number
of parsers for a given lexer,
and now you can actually parse
parentheses, brackets, braces,
comma-separated
lists, white spaces,
symbols being
predefined strings,
identifiers being whatever is
an identifier in your language,
integers, and so on.
There are a lot more
of them, and again, you
can look at the Parsec library.
So with this boilerplate, we can
start making the actual parser,
and this will be a parser
that takes a string, being
the output from
the Show function,
and it produces a
new string, which
is the XML representation
of this input string.
So we have a function with
signature, ParseShow, string
to string.
And the way this
works is that we
have a function that creates--
that is our actual parser,
and this parser is a monadic
parser, which means, basically,
that it consists of functions
that you put together.
So you actually produce
one big combined function,
and then you apply that
function to the string.
And to apply this
function to the string,
we use another
function, run_parser,
that looks as follows.
So run_parser is independent of
the actual input of the parser.
So you have a parser of a
certain data type and a string,
and it produces this output
data type that you desire.
So in our case, the data type
that we desire is a string,
so see here is a string.
And what it does is it applies
our parser to an input string,
and then if there's an
error, it reports an error.
Or if there's no error,
it returns the result.
So this function, run_parser,
is kind of generic.
So you can always reuse it.
In our case, the parser
that we want to build,
we will call showParser, and
that's a parser of string.
So it returns a string.
So with this showParser
and run_parser,
we can now build our
actual ParseShow function.
So we say, ParseShow
equals simply like this.
So maybe we want to make this
a little bit more complete.
To emit valid XML, we can tag
this with an actual XML header
string.
So let's say, we define
the XML header string as,
and then we can actually change
this function a little bit.
In the opening tag,
we must actually
create, not just the
name of the tag,
but also the list of attributes.
So the list of
attributes is a list
of tuples for the
name of the attribute
and the value of the attribute.
And so what we do is we apply
a map of a function that turns
this tuple into a string,
where we have the key,
and then equals
quote, , value, quote.
Now, so this approach here for
string concatenation is very
convenient, rather than using
the ++ in terms of readability.
So concat will
simply concatenate
all of the elements of a list.
With these tag
manipulation functions,
we are almost ready to
create the actual parses.
There's another function
that is very handy to use.
It's a function that
will join elements
of a list using newline.
So let's build that function.
We have join.
And I use the
function intercalate.
So intercalate is
a function that
takes all the elements of a
list and joins them together,
interspersed with the
particular character that
is the first argument
of this function.
But this function
intercalate is not
part of the standard
prelude, so we
have to add it to
our import list here.
With all this machinery
ready, we can now
create the rest of our parsers.
For instance, if we
want to parse a list,
so we parse brackets, and
then a comma-separated value
of whatever can
be inside the list
till we call showParser again.
And the result is the list of
the elements that we parsed.
What we do then is we tag
this list with the type list,
and then we join
them with newlines,
and each element is surrounded
by a tag list element.
The other parsers
are quite similar.
So I'll just put them all here.
We have a tuple_parser,
which parses parentheses
and then comma-separated.
So that's a tuple, and then
drops it into tuple tags.
We have the
record_parser, which first
parses the name of the
record, and then it has braces,
and then it has a
comma-separated list
of key values.
So for key values, I have an
additional parser, kvparser,
here, which parses an
identifier, equal sign,
and then whatever.
And then it returns this
wrapped in a tag element,
and then it has keys and values.
And finally, we parse
the type_identifier.
So type_identifiers
are defined as strings
that start with an uppercase
letter and then one
or more alphanumeric letters.
This is our Parser that we
use to parse the labels.
So with all these
things together,
we can actually parse a show
output and turn it into XML.
So of course, we need to change
our main program a little bit
to make that happen.
First of all, we must import
the parser that we just wrote.
And then, obviously, we must
use it, but that's very simple.
So we change the main
program just a little bit.
So we call show on
the records that we
created and put the result
in the record string.
We call ParseShow
on the record string
and that's our main program.
So now we can try this out.
And, indeed, we have
created an XML document
that represents the output of
show called on our custom data
structure.
So this is an example
of how you can
use Parsec to easily transform
strings into different strings,
for instance, XML documents.